INTRODUCTION
Public health as a field aims to promote healthy lifestyles and communities and to protect the public at large from health threats from
known and emerging diseases, chronic noncommunicable diseases,
and environmental risks and vulnerabilities. In this context, public
health authorities have a core role in prevention, preparedness, and
response to epidemic and pandemic infectious diseases. The field of
public health has a long and storied history in investigating and ending
outbreaks of infectious diseases, extending back to one of the founders
of modern epidemiology, John Snow, and the Broad Street pump cholera outbreak. Modern epidemiology and public health practices have
an integral role in the management of outbreaks, epidemics, and pandemics, using both traditional methodologies that look like the “shoe
leather epidemiology” of John Snow’s time, meshed with modern best
practices that leverage genomic sequencing, data analytics, and medical innovations in therapeutics and vaccination.
DEFINITIONS
Infectious disease outbreak response hinges on an understanding of
current and ongoing incidence and prevalence of the disease in the
affected community. The transmission dynamics of a disease will look
different in a population that is entirely susceptible (e.g., a novel or
emerging disease) than in a population in which some members are
recovered/immune (e.g., a disease has been present for some time).
Sporadic diseases occur infrequently and irregularly in a population.
Endemic diseases are continually circulating, often at low levels, maintaining a constant presence among members of the community. Epidemic disease occurs when there is a substantial increase above the baseline amount
of a disease. This may occur as an increase in a disease that is already
endemic at low levels or by the introduction of a novel disease that has not
been seen in the affected population. A pandemic refers to an epidemic
that has spread over several countries and continents, affecting large numbers of people. This is frequently defined and declared by international
public health authorities, for example, the World Health Organization.
Public Health Authorities and Partners
Although describing “public health” as a specialty may sound somewhat monolithic, the majority of public health work is done collaboratively across a variety of partners, including local, city, state, and
national public health authorities, city and state governments, healthcare systems, individual clinical providers, and members of the affected
communities. The most important aspect of public health work is often
community involvement, whether as part of outbreak investigations,
public-facing communications, or education around prevention and
response measures.
At an international level, the World Health Organization operates
as an international collaborative agency set up in 1948 under the auspices of the United Nations. One of its core responsibilities is to direct
and coordinate the world’s response to health emergencies, working
with national governments, international organizations, researchers,
and health systems. At a national level, responsibility for public health
management typically devolves to national and federal government
departments (e.g., the Department of Health and Human Services in
the United States) and their constituent agencies, such as the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The CDC coordinates
national surveillance systems for a variety of health conditions, including endemic and newly emergent diseases.
The bulk of regional and local public health surveillance, preparedness, and response work falls under the purview of city, county, and
state public health departments. These agencies liaise closely with
healthcare systems, specialty and primary care practices, and individual clinicians within their region to help facilitate their public health
goals, as well as with nonmedical partners, including school districts,
other government agencies, and community groups.
Aims of Public Health Response to Infectious Diseases
Broadly, the aims of a public health response are to prevent the emergence of novel diseases in human hosts, prevent the spread of new diseases or the increase in prevalence of a known endemic disease, and
mitigate the health effects of any spread that may occur. Based on these
goals, the arms of public health response for epidemic and pandemic
infectious diseases fall into four groupings: mitigation/prevention,
preparedness, response, and recovery. These areas stem from a common approach to emergency management in general but have specific
meanings and impact in the context of pandemic response. Some active
public health measures, such as education and public-facing communication, occur across all four arms.
Arms of Intervention
Mitigation/Prevention
A primary approach to pandemic management includes proactive activities to prevent new human infections with target diseases, both to prevent
endemic diseases from becoming epidemic and to arrest emergence of novel
diseases. Some recent epidemics and pandemics likely represent “spillover”
events from animal populations, with these zoonoses then becoming prevalent in human populations through human-to-human transmission (e.g.,
Zika, SARS-CoV-2). There is a complex interplay between human and
animal populations related to farming, deforestation, changes in land use,
water management, and climate change that makes the emergence of new
zoonotic diseases intermittently more likely and unfortunately somewhat
unpredictable. Prevention of emergence of these diseases is best approached
through a One Health approach, which is an international project using a
“collaborative, multisectoral, and transdisciplinary approach” at local,
national, and international levels to optimize health outcomes, recognizing
the interconnectedness of people, animals, plants, and their environment.
Individual approaches to prevent disease outbreaks of this type may require
the involvement of agricultural regulators and inspectors, veterinarians,
and environmental health specialists, among others.
A more concrete example of a salient mitigation effort involving
human healthcare providers is antimicrobial stewardship. The emergence of multidrug-resistant (MDR) and extensively drug-resistant
(XDR) organisms in response to the selection pressure of antimicrobial
usage is a critical vulnerability in epidemic and pandemic preparedness. Stewardship efforts at a grassroots, individual patient level provide a necessary bulwark against the proliferation of further MDR and
XDR strains of currently endemic diseases.